It was the Apple Store in New York City before there was such a thing as an Apple Store.
Before iPods and iPads and iPhones, before Apple started selling and servicing its devices out of a glass cube on Fifth Avenue, the eclectic Tekserve store on West 23rd Street in Manhattan was where customers went for upgrades to their PowerBook laptops or to have their computers fixed.
But times have changed, Tekserve’s managers said, and on Wednesday, they announced that the company was closing its retail and customer-service operation. The service center will remain open until July 31, and the retail store will close on Aug. 15. About 70 employees will lose their jobs, the company said.
“This is a cultural shift,” the company’s chief executive, Jerry Gepner, said in an interview in his office above the store. “It’s not a failure of the business. It’s like this giant wave finally crashed down upon us.”
Tekserve found its niche in an era when Apple had a much smaller slice of the computer market. Among many of Tekserve’s customers then, Apple computers had a devoted following. “It was the cult of Mac,” said Mr. Gepner, who, before running Tekserve, was a regular customer.
He said that customers had gravitated to Tekserve to buy Apple computers, have them serviced or have questions about them answered at a time when computers were more cumbersome to use and help was not simply a Google search away. “It was also a gathering place,” Mr. Gepner said, “where knowledge was shared.”
Tekserve opened in 1987, focusing exclusively on repairs at first, and has always operated out of spaces on 23rd Street, between Sixth and Seventh Avenues. More than 15 years ago, it moved into its current home, with 10,000 square feet of retail and service space, and grew into something of a New York City fixture. On “Sex and the City,” for instance, when Carrie Bradshaw’s laptop crashed, she rushed to Tekserve.
While Apple’s own stores are sleek and modern in appearance, Tekserve had the feel of a throwback, its shelves lined with old-fashioned radios and a soda machine where customers could grab a chilled Coca-Cola in a glass bottle. There was also a “museum” of Apple computers, with models dating back more than three decades, including a Macintosh 128K — the original Apple Macintosh personal computer — signed by Stephen Wozniak, the company’s co-founder.
These days, though, Apple has six stores in Manhattan, including one in Chelsea, not far from Tekserve. There is also a Best Buy store just on the other side of Sixth Avenue from Tekserve. And then there are the options online.
Resellers like Tekserve, once among the few places where customers could get Apple products, have been the victims of the technology company’s growth. But also, Tekserve said in a statement, swiftly rising rent has not helped.
Mr. Gepner said that when he joined Tekserve in 2014, the owners asked him to see whether the diminishing retail operation could be saved. But, he said, the owners realized that a turnaround seemed unlikely. “For us,” he said, “the trend wasn’t going to reverse.”
Talk of the store’s closing had circulated for weeks among neighbors and regular customers. Employees were officially told on Wednesday that the end was imminent.
“We love our customers, and we love what we do,” Mr. Gepner said. “But there comes a point where that doesn’t make sense anymore, as much as we love it.”
The company will continue with its corporate sales and professional services, as well as with an operation focused on small- and medium-size businesses, an area that has experienced growth, Mr. Gepner said.
Outside the store on Wednesday afternoon, word had not yet reached many customers, who said they were disappointed. Alan Wolk said he had been coming to Tekserve for about 15 years, including once to repair a keyboard damaged by spilled coffee.
“It’s been here forever,” he said. “These guys, they know their stuff. You can trust them.”
Kerry Elson said she first came to Tekserve about a decade ago, when she was still working as an intern and trying to figure out how to use a new computer. She kept coming because she trusted those who worked there.
“I feel like this is my go-to,” she said. “It seemed like they were on your side.”