OMAHA — In the first three races of her third Olympic trials — two heats of the 100-meter backstroke and the 200-meter freestyle preliminaries — Missy Franklin swam scared. She put together a more composed race in the semifinals of the 200, and then a day later, in Wednesday’s final, Franklin broke free of the chains of anxiety that had constrained her.
Franklin, 21, finished second to Katie Ledecky in a time of 1 minute 56.18 seconds to earn a berth in the individual event and the 4x200 freestyle relay at the Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro. Ledecky was clocked in 1:54.88.
“People say there’s nothing like making your first Olympic team,” Franklin said. “But there’s nothing like making your second Olympic team.”
Allison Schmitt, the reigning Olympic champion in the 200 freestyle, will not defend her title. But the tears she shed after the race were not from disappointment. “I don’t know the last time I had happy tears,” said Schmitt, who finished fourth to secure her passage to Rio as a relay team member.
Franklin and Schmitt embraced after the race. Few people could understand Schmitt’s emotions better than Franklin, who finished seventh in the 100-meter backstroke on Tuesday. She needed to finish in the top two to be able to defend her Olympic title in the event.
“Last night was really hard,” Franklin said, adding that she had struggled to handle the expectations and pressure that she felt to match, or exceed, her 2012 performances. She was thinking about making the Olympic team, she said, and that was the wrong mind-set. “It’s just to swim well,” she said.
And swim well Franklin did, earning the admiration of the 19-year-old Ledecky in the process. “I told her after the race she’s one tough cookie,” Ledecky said. “She got the job done tonight.”
Melanie Margalis also showed her toughness by working an overtime shift. After finishing sixth in the 200 freestyle, which put her on the Olympic relay, she came back less than an hour later and somehow found a closing kick to out-touch Caitlin Leverenz, the bronze medalist in the event in 2012, by five-hundredths of a second with a 2:11.11. Maya DiRado, the winner of the 400 I.M., completed the double by touching first in 2:09.54.
“I can’t believe that just happened,” said Margalis, adding: “That 200 was one of the most painful I’ve had recently, so at first I was kind of like, oh, know, I have another event to do. But it worked out O.K.”