In the early morning hours of Labor Day last year, a group of gunmen from the 8-Trey street gang made their way through a crowd of revelers gathered near a Brooklyn public housing project to celebrate J’ouvert, a pre-dawn party that precedes the annual West Indian American Day Parade. The housing project was “enemy territory,” the authorities said, the stronghold of a rival gang, the Folk Nation.
As hundreds of people drank and danced in costume, the warring factions spotted each other, and a gunfight broke out in the darkness. Caught in the crossfire was an up-and-coming lawyer in the administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, Carey Gabay, who was at the festivities with his brother. Mr. Gabay, 43, who was of Jamaican heritage, died a week later from his wounds.
For some in government and law enforcement circles, the death of Mr. Gabay, who had risen from a childhood in Bronx public housing to Harvard Law School and then to public service, was emblematic of the havoc that street gangs have inflicted on New York City residents.
On Wednesday, as part of a continuing investigation, the authorities announced that three men had been indicted in the killing.
One of the men, Micah Alleyne, 24, was already in custody, having been indicted last month. The other two — Tyshawn Crawford, 21, and Keith Luncheon, 24 — were named along with Mr. Alleyne in a new indictment on Wednesday, which holds all three equally responsible for Mr. Gabay’s murder. Each of the men is charged with second-degree murder.
“These defendants are charged with creating a killing field in a crowd of innocent people, showing depraved indifference to human life and causing the death of Carey Gabay,” Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, said in a statement about the case.
At a news conference at his office, Mr. Thompson said that 20 gang members, armed with as many as 27 guns, had taken part in the gunfight in which dozens of shots were fired. He promised to seek indictments against the others involved in the episode. “This is just the beginning,” he said.
At the time of his death, Mr. Gabay was first deputy counsel for the Empire State Development Corporation and lived with his wife in the Clinton Hill section of Brooklyn. He was shot in the head while trying to escape the gunfire by ducking between two cars in a parking lot at the Ebbets Field Houses on Bedford Avenue in Crown Heights.
The housing complex had long been Folk Nation turf, Mr. Thompson said, and several of the gang’s members were among the crowd on an outdoor patio there during the J’ouvert celebration. Most of the shots fired that morning came from the direction of the patio, Mr. Thompson added. Members of both the Folk Nation and the 8-Treys had standing orders, he said, to open fire at each other on sight.
“When these two gangs see each other,” Mr. Thompson said, “there is no talking, just shooting.”
Surveillance-camera footage taken that morning, which Mr. Thompson played at the news conference, showed people frantically fleeing the patio and scurrying for cover as shots rang out. Investigators also discovered footage that Mr. Thompson said shows Mr. Alleyne firing a gun into the crowd, then running into a building at the Ebbets Field Houses.
Mr. Alleyne, who was living in a homeless shelter in Jamaica, Queens, when he was arrested in May, was a Folk Nation member, Mr. Thompson said. He added that Mr. Crawford, who lives in East New York, belonged to the Hoodstarz gang, which is allied with the Folk Nation. Mr. Thompson described Mr. Luncheon, who lives in Crown Heights, as a member of the 8-Trey gang, a faction of the Crips.
A fourth defendant, Stanley Elianor, 25, was indicted in October on weapons charges in connection with Mr. Gabay’s murder for carrying a MAC-10 machine pistol during the melee.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton, appearing with Mr. Thompson at the news conference, said his department was targeting street gangs across the city, adding that officers had arrested gang members in three separate operations in Manhattan on Wednesday morning. Mr. Bratton also said that this year, for the first time, J’ouvert organizers would have to secure a permit for their event, which has traditionally taken place without official city approval. The police, the commissioner said, would increase their presence at the festivities in September to ensure there was no violence.
“If so much as a sneeze is made by these gangs in the run-up to the festival, we will be there,” Mr. Bratton said, “and not to say, ‘gesundheit.’ ”